
# The World

This text describes a particular way of being a Game Master for several
tabletop Role Playing Games, RPG. It is similar to all the games that describes
them self as "Powered by the Apocalypse", where the person hosting the game is
commonly called "Master of Ceremony".  We will instead use a the name "World"
and we will try to describe such role in a way that it could be applied to
several RPG.

Probably it is already clear, but this text is strongly opinated. It encourages
little preparation, continuous improvisation, and a strong inclusion of the
other players in the creative process that commonly is prerogative of the
master.

In most regards the World is just a normal Player: you act and react to what
the other Players say and do, moment by moment, using your character and their
actions to experience and explore places, people, and events.

In a nutshell, you __play to find out__ what happens next.

The main difference is that "your character" is a multitude of NPCs and
locations, while we call their action "World Reactions". This is a bit more
demanding than what other Players are required to do in the game, but not by
much, and this whole text exists to teach you, guide you, and support you in
playing the World as effectively and comfortably as possible; follow these
instructions closely.

This text was almost entirely extracted from https://fantasyworldrpg.com, so
you can refer to its license: it was released under CC BY 4.0 by Alessandro
Piroddi, Luca Maiorani, MS Edizioni, 2020-2023. The modification are so minimal
that you can not give credit for them at all. If you really need an official
statement: they are released under CC0 by Mimmo Mane, 2023.

# Agenda

  - Play to find out
  - Make sense
  - Rock the boat

These three goals are your Agenda, the three things you should strive to
accomplish during the game with every single word you say and choice you make.
__It is not your job__ to entertain an audience of Players. __It is not your
job__ to be a judge of good roleplay or an arbiter of fair challenges. __It is
not your job__ to be the adversary, to defeat the Protagonists, to deny them
what they want, to punish them, to control them, or to surprise them by yanking
the rug out from under their feet. Most of all, __it is not your job__ to
pre-plan a storyline.

__So what is your job?__ I'm glad you asked...

## Play to Find Out

Playing to find out __is
the main goal of the game__ for the World and Players alike. You do it by
coming to the table with dreams and ideas and desires, by imagining a world
full of mystical places, weird creatures, and unusual peoples, but __never
clinging to them__.

Things might come to pass as you imagine them, or differently, or not at all.
__Any__ outcome is a good one for you because your core directive is "_this is
cool, now I wonder what will happen next!_". The rest of this text offers
plenty of practical tools to help you achieve this easily, and then make the
most out of it.

## Make Sense

As World you don't need (nor want) to be a novel writer, movie director, or
even a storyteller. You just need to make both the setting and the characters
within it __feel lifelike and reasonable__. There are two easy ways to achieve
this.

One is to __communicate__. What looks sensible to you might seem baffling to
someone else, so then what good is it? So don't ever expect others to "get
you;" instead, offer them your ideas, voice your opinions and concerns, but
also __listen__ to the others and be __ready to accept their input__. Be ready
to compromise, and to help others compromise as well.

Two is to __do the obvious thing__ as much as possible. __Be banal__! Use
narrative archetypes, stereotypes, and clich√©s you know and love. Don't try to
be clever, mysterious, and unpredictable. Instead, portray everything
__transparently__: people, monsters, animals, even the land and the plants and
the weather. Start by making your world __consistent__ and __predictable__;
this will make it feel __reasonable__, solid and I dare say realistic.
Surprises will later emerge spontaneously.

## Rock the Boat

Protagonists' lives should be interesting, adventurous, and dramatic. There are
good ways and bad ways to achieve these goals. Rocking the boat __is not__
about coming up with implausible plot twists or stealing victory away from
Protagonists when they least expect it. Instead, you can rock the boat in a
_play-to-find-out_ way just by looking at your NPCs, finding out what they
want, and having them __act to get it__.

This could mean __something big__: a street thug wants a better life __so__
they start a gang that stirs up trouble in the city; an orc warrior wants to
become a hero __so__ they raise an army to invade the human lands; a
heartbroken magician wants to bring a loved one back to life __so__ they mess
around with dark powers that could threaten the realm.

This could also mean __something small__: someone wants to help a Protagonist
but ends up being in the way and creating trouble; someone wants personal gain
and is willing to go against a Protagonist for it; someone wants something but
incidentally, a Protagonist is in their way.

Character... desire... action... __this__ is how you _Rock the boat_.

# Always Say

  - What the principles demand
  - What the rules demand
  - What your prep demands
  - What honesty demands

In the target RPG, each __Player__ should say what their Protagonist says and does,
what they think, feel and remember, and answers questions about their lives and
surroundings.

As the __World,__ you instead should say everything else: how the environment appears
and behaves, and what every Non-Protagonist Character says,does,thinks, and
feels.

Whether you are the World or a Protagonist, be sure that among the things you
say, you also _Always say_ the things demanded in the list above. Here is why:

## What the principles demand

In the next section you'll be presented with a short list of __Principles__,
things you should strive to __do__ in order to better achieve the goals set in
your Agenda. _Always say what the principles demand_.

## What the rules demand

The game __rules__ are meant to manipulate and shape the conversation happening
between Players in unique ways. Rules will ask you to say some things or to say
things in a specific way. This is what helps you all experience an engaging and
unique story without the effort and skill that writing a novel would require.
_Always say what the rules demand_.

## What your prep demands

Even without pre-planning you will end up __preparing__ some material, making
__decisions__ about what the environment looks like and how the NPCs act and
react, putting down in writing lists of things, facts, events, and all sorts of
other details. Be true to your ideas and clear in relaying them. _Always say
what your prep demands_.

## What honesty demands

The Players depend on the World to give them __real__ information they can use
to imagine and understand what's happening around their Protagonists. Being
abundantly clear and honest is always your best policy. Play with integrity and
an open hand, as the Protagonists are entitled to the full benefits (and
consequences) of their actions, their rolls, their resources. Don't withhold
information, don't weasel out of plain answers, __don't play gotchas__. _Always
say what honesty demands_.

# The Principles

  - Drape the rules in fiction
  - Portray simple people
  - Kill your darlings mercilessly
  - Be a fan of the protagonists
  - Think off-screen too
  - Ask honest questions

Principles are fundamental truths that serve as the foundation for all the
systems in the game. Here they are expressed as actions: do this thing to
obtain this effect, do this other thing to create this feeling, etc. They are
meant to be __practical tools__ the World uses to achieve the goals set by the
game's __Agenda__.

## Drape the Rules in Fiction

In order to _Make Sense_ you need to summon the illusion of a lifelike and
reasonable world. One tool to achieve such an aim is to __drape the rules in
fiction__. Here are some practical applications:

### Talk to the Protagonists, not to the Players

Don't address the other Players by their real names; instead, __speak directly
to the Protagonist characters__. This helps Players to stay in-fiction
throughout the play session, but it also makes it starkly clear when you are
addressing the Player about an out-of-game issue, which is particularly useful
when dealing with the ___One Golden Rule___.

```

Address the Protagonist: "Lady Deanna, do you want to kill or spare him?"

Not the Player: "Julia, does Lady Deanna want to kill or spare him?"

Unless Needed: "Julia, is it ok for you if I describe Lady Deanna this way?"

```

### Fake Causality

When you use a _World Reaction_ (explained in just a little while), and
possibly every time you appy a game rule, __pretend to
do it because of in-fiction __(diegetic)__ reasons__. That's a ruse of course;
you do it because of something that happened at the table: someone describes
something relevant, somebody misses a roll, some mechanic calls for you to
answer, somebody's waiting for you to say something.

You react because of the failed roll. But you chose __this Reaction__ because
it was fitting the fictional situation. And then you described it __as if__ its
effect was a natural consequence of the characters' actions, an obvious
__cause-and-effect__ within the fiction.

```

Player - I try to fast-talk the guards into letting me and Deanna be.

A roll results in a failure. This leads the World to select a World Reaction.
In this case, they choose to Take Away Their People.

BAD World - You miss the roll, so you two get separated!

GOOD World - They seem outraged by your bullshit, so they shove you aside and
drag Deanna away!

```

### Don't Name the Rule or the Reaction

By the same token, __never just say the name of the Reaction__ you use, or the rule you apply.
Instead, describe its effects in fiction.

If your Reaction is to _Take Away Their People_ don't just state "_you get
separated_" but describe the guards dragging Deanna away.

If your Reaction is to _Inflict harm_ don't just state "_the attack inflicts
Temp harm_" but describe how a guard steps forward and viciously hits the
Protagonist in the back with the butt of a pike.

__You can__ also specify the mechanical effects if something is not immediately
clear and obvious. And __you must__ answer honestly if a Player asks you for
clarifications. But never, ever, just state the mechanical effect without
__first__ describing how it looks in the fiction.

```

Fiction First, Mechanics Later: "The guard hits you like this ... it looks like
a temporary harm ..."

```

### Be Honest

These techniques are never meant to hide the rules or to keep the World's
actions secret and unintelligible. They just mean that you should convey this
info in a __fictional__ way whenever possible. And if a Player asks "_Wait,
which Rule was that?!_" you should be open and forthcoming about it. Rules are
not a dirty thing to be hidden away. Answer plainly, say the name of the
Reaction, explain your reasoning and process. __This is very useful for the
World to properly learn how to wield the mechanics of this game__.

Once you do what it takes to be honest, go back to a fiction-first approach and
do whatever you can to drape all your game actions in a veil of fiction.

## Portray Simple People

This is part of how you can both _Make Sense_ and _Rock the Boat_. First of
all, you need to __give a name__ to all your NPCs. As soon as they get even a
single line of dialogue or any significant on-screen action, name them.

But names are only the beginning. Find one striking physical feature in each
NPC, __a body part__. What NPCs do in life is __follow their _parts_ around__ -
their nose, their stomach, their big ears, their genitals, their gut, their
childish smile, their crazy hair, their wide eyes, their clenched fist, their
broken heart. And they are pretty straightforward about it! They do what they
want to do when they want to do it, and if something gets in their way they
deal with it __now__.

Whenever possible make __everyone__ into _Simple People._ Be they kings or
farmers, give them a simple drive, and have them act according to it. Actually,
make __anything capable of action__ into _Simple People_: animals, monsters,
talking swords, sentient plants, even places if you can imagine a metaphorical
way for them to have a drive and to act on it.

Once you have _Simple People_ at hand, make sure that their uncomplicated
self-interests involve the Protagonists __individually__, not as a group. Show
different sides of their personalities to the different Protagonists in play.

```

How to Name a Name

Names are both trivial and very important.

Trivial, because you need to produce a ton of names. And you don't know whether
they will stick around or be forgotten after a couple of scenes. So don't
stress. Just slap any name on a new NPC and be done with it. Or ask the Players
to come up with names, who cares?!

Important, because extremes matter. A particularly silly or bad name can ruin
the illusion of a story that Makes Sense. Likewise, a particularly apt or
memorable name can be enough to turn a random NPC into a recurring character.
Mind the extremes; avoid the bad, embrace the good.

```

## Kill Your Darlings Mercilessly

Whenever your attention lands on someone or something that you own, __consider
killing it__, overthrowing it, burning it down, blowing it up. Be it an
individual NPC, a faction of NPCs, some arrangement between NPCs, even an
entire reign or civilization, consider razing it to the ground.

This plays right into _Rocking the Boat_: no champion is unbeatable, no
fortress is impregnable, no pact is unbreakable. This keeps the terrain
shifting under the Protagonists feet, for good or ill. They might be able to
accomplish great feats that will change the world but are also __never safe
from danger and uncertainty__. There are two sides to this coin.

One, the Protagonists will try to break your things, __so let them__. By all
means show them a good fight, toy around with tactics, maneuvering, threats,
and everything that leads up to the moment of real violence; but as soon as
your NPCs suffer harm you should consider __breaking__ them: defeated, wounded,
incapacitated, scared, demoralised, find a way to have them __stop fighting__.
The harm effects give you plenty of options. Unless violence is truly of
dramatic importance, you should keep it as __short and to the point__ as
possible. This actually enhances its narrative effect, making harm feel brutal
and dangerous.

Two, break your own things __because you can__. Protagonists go around doing
stuff and this is all good and well, but actions have consequences. Have
__others__ pay for the Protagonists' actions. Remember your __simple people__;
NPCs might balk at the idea of going against the Protagonists and therefore
might choose easier targets like a family of peasants or a young servant. Or
the Protagonists' allies could be less careful and subtle than what the Players
hope for. Or they might leverage the Protagonists' presence and actions to
settle personal grudges and scores. It's all your stuff, after all, so __put
your bloody fingerprints on everything you touch__.

## Be a Fan of the Protagonists

Being a fan of the Protagonists means that you like them and want to see more
of them. So __always avoid__ taking away the things that make the Protagonists
cool to begin with:the Veteran's ancestral weapon, but also the Veteran's
collection of poems that they don't allow anyone to read. The things that make
the Protagonists match our expectations and also what makes them rise above
them. Don't take those away. At least, not for prolonged periods of time.

But an easy life of constant success with no real challenge is rarely
interesting, both to experience firsthand and to witness unfold. The game
mechanics should see that this does not come to pass, giving you the right
tools to _Rock the Boat_. But rocking the boat doesn't mean sinking it.

The best way to avoid such extremes is to strive to _Make Sense_. And a very
easy way to achieve this is to have Protagonists' actions be __consequential__.
Always give the Protagonists what they work for, but then ask yourself: how
will my NPCs respond? Reevaluate the things driving your _Simple People_. Whose
needs change? Whose opinions change? Who was an enemy, but now is afraid? Whose
allegiances have shifted? Who benefits from recent changes? Who gets hurt by
them?

Let the Protagonists' successes __ripple outward__.

## Think Offscreen Too

When it's time for you to React, imagine what your various NPCs must have been
doing in the meantime. Have any of them done something offscreen that now
becomes evident? Are any of them doing things offscreen that, while invisible
to the Protagonists, deserve your quiet acknowledgement? This is part of having
the setting _Make Sense_ and, if you pay attention to your Agents (explained in
a little while), is part of _Rocking the Boat_ too.

But if you spend your Reaction to develop stuff off screen, what should happen
__on screen__? Nine times out of ten the best option is to __gift the
Protagonists with a success__. Success can move things forward much better than
failure, and it's also easier to improvise: just give  the Protagonist what
they were trying to get. Besides, you __did__ react, you __did__ change things,
so it's not like the Protagonists are getting a free pass.

A great thing to do when you develop an off-screen situation is to put an
Hourglass on it. This will be explained better in a later
chapter, but it basically means that you have a way to keep track of the
progress of an ongoing situation developing in the background.

```

In a nutshell

Reward them ON screen while you (amicably) mess with them OFF screen.

Do it while keeping true to the Be a Fan principle, and everything will be
fine.

```

## Ask Honest Questions

Playing the role of World doesn't mean you have to know everything about
everything; after all, you are __playing to find out__ too! By asking honest
questions you can make your job as World both __easier__ and __more fun__ when
it comes to three important areas:

  - Creating new content on the fly.
  - Making decisions you'd rather not make.
  - Finding ways to engage the Players and leverage their Protagonists.

### Create New Content

When you need to __come up with content__ for the setting, ask a specific
Player for an explanation of how something in the game world is or how it
works. Try to do this __only__ when your question touches on an obvious
__interest or expertise__ of their Protagonist, and __keep it specific__.

```

BAD question: "Occultist, how does magic work?"

This is a terrible question. Too big, too vague, too abstract.

GOOD question: "Occultist, is magic immoral or illegal where you come from?"

This is much better. It's easy to answer, just a detail, but ripe with
potential consequences.

More Good Examples: "Troubadour, have you ever been in this city before?"
"Wayfarer, which plant grows in this region that can serve your purpose? What
does it look like? Does it have a unique smell?"

```

### Delegate Decisions

When you need to __make decisions you don't want__ to make yourself, you can
ask...

  - ... an __NPC__ what to do by honestly asking yourself, "_What would this
    NPC do in this situation?_" Yes, you are still making the decision
yourself, but this gives you a way to make it with integrity and to help you
figure out what could _Make Sense_.
  - ... _Mother When & Father Time_ what to do, which is to say you can avoid
    the decision by turning it into an Hourglass. Again, you are making the
decision yourself, but this way it might or might not happen because of how
future events unfold, not because of an immediate arbitrary decision; it also
gives you the time and means to plan its execution instead of just winging it.
  - ... the __Protagonists__ what to do by asking them what they would __do
    here and now__ about the thing you are deciding on. So don't ask yourself
"_Will Samara live?_" but instead ask them "_Samara is gravely wounded, what do
you do?_". If they do nothing, she dies. If they somehow help, she lives. Be
honest! After all, you wanted them to decide for you, why cheat?

### Engage the Players

When you need help figuring out __how to engage__ the Players, but also to have
things and events _Make Sense_ for them specifically and to _Rock the Boat_ for
them in a personal way, your best option is to ask a Player for __immediate and
intimate__ details about their Protagonist's experience. Immediate, as in where
they are, what they would do, how they would do it, why they are doing it.
Intimate, as in how they __feel__ about it, what they __think__ about it. Are
they afraid or excited? Have they thought about the other person's perspective?
Do they think of themselves as righteous and heroic? Why? How?

Keep an eye on the Protagonists' Issue and Doubt and compare them to their
actions and thoughts, then ask questions about what you see: do they match? Do
they diverge? What does this say about the Protagonist as a person? By doing so
you will uncover the things the Protagonists (and their Players) truly care
about and are invested in.

But asking questions is only half of it. The other half is __putting the
answers to good use__:

  - Use them to inform your own aesthetic, incorporating them and their
    implications into your own vision.
  - Refer to them later in play, bringing them back up into current events.
  - Build on them, adding details and imagery of your own.

```

World - So Lady Ennoia threatens the burgomaster and gets the info she needed.
How does she feel about this? How does this fit with her Doubt "I don't want to
be like my father"?

Player - Oh shit, I did not think about that. She... she laughs at the man's
cowardice. But inside she feels uneasy, although maybe she doesn't really see
why. I mean, father was way worse than this!

World - Sure. If you say so...

Player - You are evil!

World - Thanks.

```

# World Reactions

  - Hit the Issue / Feed the Doubt
  - Show signs of trouble
  - Highlight a downside
  - Show an opportunity
  - Reveal an unwelcome truth
  - Take away their stuff
  - Take away their people
  - Turn their action back on them
  - Inflict harm
  - Put them at a Disadvantage
  - Make an Agent Reaction

```

After __every__ Reaction ask "_what do you do?_"

```

__World Reactions__ are cues that help the Wold to make something happen in
the fictional reality of the game. Since the World has to _Drape the Rules in
Fiction_, the end result of a Reaction is __simply a short narration__: the
NPCs say and do stuff, the consequences of some action are shown, some
meaningful detail is brought to the Protagonists' attention. And then
__always__ add: "_What do you do?_"

It is important to notice, though, that Reactions are __not__ meant to always
be problematic or challenging. They are __not__ a way for the World to "punish"
an unlucky roll or a poor decision. They are meant to make Protagonists' lives
interesting, to achieve your __Agenda,__ and to implement your __Principles__.
This sometimes means challenging and even hurting (_or killing!_) the PCs, but
other times could mean giving them unexpectedly good news, revealing tempting
opportunities, or allowing for some respite. Part of the World's job is to
judge how to best use their Reactions on a case-by-case basis during active
play.

## Open & Closed
 
Some situation are perfect for introduce a __World Reaction__ and they are
commons to a wide variety of games.

Reactions can be performed in an __Open__ or __Closed__ way, and then the World
is allowed to perform one, __and only one__, of their Reactions when...

  - __[Open]__ ...the Protagonists somehow __look at the World__ to know what
    happens next.
  - __[Open]__ ...the Protagonists (not the Players) __waste__ __time__ or
    __wait__ for something to happen.
  - __[Open or Closed]__ ...the consequences of a __previous Open__ Reaction
    come together without interference.
  - __[Open or Closed]__ ...specific actions of a Protagonist call for a
    Reaction.

An __Open__ Reaction is a Reaction that offers the Protagonists some
opportunity to act and respond. __It's a start__ to the action, not its
conclusion. It's how you __set up__ events for future __Closed__ Reactions.

A __Closed__ Reaction is something the Protagonists can't avoid or prevent
anymore. It's not necessarily a mean or cruel Reaction, but simply a
__definitive__ one.

As a rule of thumb, Reactions __are always Open__ unless the proper conditions
apply. When the proper conditions apply, a Reaction can be either __Open__ or
__Closed__ as the World sees fit.

The last item of the previous list strongly depends on the game. Some games may
explicitly request in some moment to add something to the fiction, so it may be
trivial to understand where to add a __Reaction__ . But in generate, you need
to analyze the game and find the right place where to put the Reactions.  They
should be situations where the fiction needs a kick to go ahead, or where the
consequences of the PCs actions should be shown. Decide it in advance, then try
to stick with your decision.  

A __success__ in a roll is always an effective way to move things forward in
interesting and meaningful ways. When in doubt, if the games allows you, grant
success and then focus on __what happens next__, on the consequences and
ramifications. But success is not always available or, if you want to _Rock the
boat_, not always desirable.  _World Reactions_ are an effective way to change
the situation and set the stage for future action.

A __failure___ in a roll instead tend to be a good place to make a Reaction,
also a Closed one . But some games tend to ask for long sequence of rolls in
some situations, e.g.  during the battles. Here maybe it is better to not make
a Reaction after each fail, but for example only on critical failures or
successes, if there are such mechanics.

## The Right Time and Place

Whenever possible, Reactions should happen __almost immediately__. The World
should avoid at all costs situations where they delay a Reaction so much that
it might end up being forgotten, lost in the flow of play, or, even worse, when
multiple Reactions pile up. In the former case, the game would feel bland,
while in the latter it would seem punitive. If for any reason the World doesn't
feel like messing with a situation when they should perform a Reaction, the
right thing to do is to __shift the Reaction somewhere else__.

It's important to understand that Reactions __are not tied to their source__. A
Player does something that grants a Reaction to the World, then the World does
something somewhere to change the fiction __of the game__, not necessarily the
fiction tied to the Player's action. Sure, the World will often find it obvious
and desirable to React in a way that has to do with the source of the
Reaction...

```

The Scoundrel rolls a failure and the World comes up with a Reaction (Open or
Closed) that has to do with the situation the PC is in. It could look like a
direct consequence (you tripped an alarm) or just a chance event (guards happen
to pass by).

```

...but it is also possible, and can be very effective and convenient, to
perform the Reaction in a way that has nothing to do with its source. This has
many benefits:

  - It helps with keeping ___Spotlight Management___ dynamic, shifting the
    focus from one PC/situation to a different PC/situation.

TODO : add chapter about Spotlight Management ???

```

Zamtar gets to a roof and settles in, monitoring the activity of his mark.

Just waiting around for stuff to happen gives the World an Open Reaction, which
they use to make something happen somewhere else...

"...in the meantime... Bolana, you hear a sudden knocking at the door..."

```

  - It helps manage the __Difficulty__ of a situation, giving a breather to
    some PCs while applying more pressure to others.

```

Gaelan is valiantly fighting a rock troll but is probably in over her
head, so when she fails a roll, the World looks at the other PCs and, seeing
how Fruss is still unharmed, uses the available Reaction to put
them under more pressure.

"Infuriated by Gaelan's attacks, the rock troll rampages around the cave
causing the earth to shake and some stones to fall. Fruss, one is about to
crush you! What do you do?"

```

  - It helps the World when they have no clear idea how to change one
    situation, allowing them to instead change a different situation that right
now comes easier to them.

```

Some NPCs are negotiating a trade, with Trax supervising the event.
Trax is kind of just waiting to see what happens, giving an Open Reaction to
the World. But the World too is not yet sure how to proceed, so they spend
their Open Reaction on a situation that is much clearer in their head.

"Deanna you manage to meet Lasher, but she has a worried
expression on her face..."

```

  - it helps the World to _Think Offscreen Too_, as they can use the Reaction
    to push events forward that are evolving in the background

```

The PCs are caught up in a tense and hectic situation when one of them fails a
roll.

The World doesn't want to make a complicated situation even more difficult, so
instead, they look at their notes. It turns out that a band of marauders was
supposed to attack the village, sooner or later, and there was even an
Hourglass tracking it. The World thus opts to advance that Hourglass. Nothing
needs to be described right now, or at least not while the PCs are so fervently
engaged, but the game state has changed and the World will somehow communicate
it as soon as the PCs get out of the immediate pickle.

```

## World Reactions List

### Show Signs of Trouble

Use this Reaction to raise __tension__ and to __set up__ future Reactions:
don't show a beast, but traces of the beast's presence; don't describe an
ambush, but tell the PCs they feel observed or followed or like there is
tension in the air; don't have a tragedy happen here and now, but bring word of
a tragedy happening somewhere else, or that threatens to happen in the (near?)
future.

You can also use this Reaction to help you _Think Offscreen Too_: divert your
attention away from the situation at hand and instead ponder the story so far
as a whole for a moment. Imagine some sort of "___Meanwhile...___" situation
that has happened, is happening, or will happen somewhere else. Make a note of
it, and maybe advance or create an Hourglass to track its progress. Finally, be
sure to show signs of it as soon as possible, ideally within the current scene
or the next one.

Of all the Reactions, _Showing Signs of Trouble_ is probably the most difficult
to clearly distinguish between its Open and Closed versions. Fortunately, it's
also the one that causes the least trouble when accidentally mishandled. In a
way, you can't go wrong. Just __be mindful__ of what you are supposed to do
mechanically, and then narrate what comes easier and more naturally. 

  <table><tr><td>

___Open Examples___

  </td><td>

___Closed Examples___

  </td></tr><tr><td>

__World__ - The door is old damp wood, so if the _dugbar_ rats start chewing on
it, it won't last more than a few minutes. _What do you do?_

  </td><td>

__World__ - The _dugbar_ rats are chewing through the door and will enter any
minute now. _What do you do?_

  </td></tr><tr><td>

__World__ - You scare the thugs away but their boss shouts "_This is not over!
You hear me? This is not over!_"    [__Hourglass__ : [_tension with the Red
Capes_]

  </td><td>

__World__ - You notice a tattoo on the smuggler's neck... it's the same the
_Red Capes_ wear! But the smuggler notices you noticing, and his expression
changes - eyes darting towards a patch of darkness to the right, deeper in the
alleyway. _What do you do?_

  </td></tr><tr><td>

__World__ - The king invites you to stay at court, but you notice how various
courtesans seem inexplicably tense about it. _What do you do?_ Do you accept
the offer?

  </td><td>

__World__ - The king invites you to stay at court, but before you can say
anything you recognise a face in the crowd of courtesans and dignitaries: the
Duke of Lanverse is looking at you with hostility. It's obvious he doesn't want
you at court. _What do you do?_ Do you accept the offer?

  </td></tr></table>

### Highlight a Downside

This Reaction has less to do with thwarting or limiting the Protagonists'
actions, and more to do with having things _Make Sense_ and with _Rocking the
Boat_. Simply look at the current situation and describe (highlight) how
something is, or could be, problematic. Look at the Protagonists'
__Equipment__, __Race__, __Class__, __Wounds__, __Harms__, or any other
specific circumstance of the protagonists.

If the game give you a way to alter the status of a person, object or location,
you may consider to do it.

  <table><tr><td>

___Open Examples___

  </td><td>

___Closed Examples___

  </td></tr><tr><td>

__World__ - If you let them get closer, the goblins will be too close for you
to use your ___[huge]___ dragon-slayer sword._ What do you do?_

  </td><td>

__World__ - The goblins are too close for you to use your ___[huge]___
dragon-slayer sword. _What do you do instead?_

  </td></tr><tr><td>

__World__ - You are about to talk to the inn-keeper about the steep prices when
you notice how everyone in the room seems to give you the stink-eye, and you
even overhear someone mutter "___[half-blood___]_ scum_" under their breath.
_What do you do?_

  </td><td>

__World__ - You start haggling for a better price at the tavern when the
inn-keeper brusquely interrupts you, spits on the floor, and says "_You know
what? We don't have rooms for __[half-blood]__ scum like you. Piss off!_" _What
do you do?_

  </td></tr><tr><td>

__World__ - A villager throws a tomato at you, nothing serious. But when your
___[wolf companion]___ sees you get hit by something and then start dripping
red, she starts growling and tensing up, ready to jump at the assailant's
throat. _What do you do?_

  </td><td>

__World__ - A villager throws a tomato at you, nothing serious. But when your
___[wolf companion]___ sees you get hit by something and then start dripping
red, she growls and jumps at the assailant's throat. _What do you do?_

  </td></tr></table>

### Show an Opportunity

Reactions are all about having stuff happen that will __change the situation__
and move events along. _Showing an Opportunity_ allows the World to lead
Protagonists towards an interesting direction without forcing their hand, or
avoid a situation from stalling, or present juicy hard choices. It is a direct
expression of _Being a Fan_.

Some opportunities might have a __catch__ of some kind: "_here is an
opportunity __but__..."_. Be honest and forthcoming about it. An informed hard
choice is always better than a startling sucker punch. At times the Players
might consider your imagined catch as trivial, but this is not a problem. Make
a note of this to help you learn what the PCs/Players care about or not, what
makes them tick, what engages them.

Not all opportunities need to have a catch. Instead, they can provide an easy
way out, a moment of respite, a tempting chance. These things are incredibly
__valuable to the World__, helping you get out of three common problematic
situations:

  - The Players are stuck or cornered, with little idea of what to do next.
  - A tense situation, often a fight or a chase, drags on too long, losing
    steam and interest.
  - A long string of bad rolls makes it difficult for the World to come up with
    reasonable or interesting negative outcomes.

In all these cases, showing an opportunity is __your__ easy way out, seamlessly
and elegantly pushing things forward without feeling unpleasant for the
Players. No cheating to save them, no railroading to force them; just _Show
them an opportunity_ and let them make their choices. 

  <table><tr><td>

___Open Examples___

  </td><td>

___Closed Examples___

  </td></tr><tr><td>

__World__ - The stone golem is beating you badly while your weapons clink on
its rock-hard skin, ineffective. But if you manage to lure it more to the left
while fighting, its position should shift away from the door enough to leave it
unobstructed___.___ _What do you do?_

  </td><td>

__World__ - The stone golem is beating you badly while your weapons clink on
its rock-hard skin, ineffective. But while fighting its position has shifted a
bit away from the door, which is now unobstructed___.___ _What do you do?_

  </td></tr><tr><td>

__World__ - The guards seem hostile, but from what you've gathered of the
situation you think that by snitching on the farmer's hiding place the guards
might be persuaded to let you go. _What do you do?_

  </td><td>

__World__ - The guards' chieftain says "_Tell us where the farmer is hiding and
we'll let you go... or we'll arrest you in his stead._" _What do you do?_

  </td></tr><tr><td>

__Player__ - Evart raises his hands in defeat: "_And how are we supposed to get
the Jade Monkey? We're stuck!_"  __World__ - Maybe the merchant near the river
could help? You remember how his stall was full of precious gems and little
statues, and how he seemed to conduct himself in a very shady way. _What do you
do?_

  </td><td>

__Player__ - Evart raises his hands in defeat: "_And how are we supposed to get
the Jade Monkey? We're stuck!_"  __World__ - While debating what to do, you
hear a knocking at the door. It's a child that, with a face both very serious
and cute, says: "_My master has heard of your predicament and would like to
make you an offer. Please follow me._" _What do you do?_

  </td></tr></table>

### Reveal an Unwelcome Truth

When the Protagonists try to acquire information and something triggers a
_World Reaction_, you should always give them bad news rather than no news.
They "succeed" but what they get is not what they expected or hoped for. Or, as
a consequence of __any kind of action__, your Reaction can be to suddenly
reveal a startling or problematic detail. In any case, when revealing new info
about something, consider if it could be written in a character sheet altering
their status.

Whether __Open__ or __Closed__, an unwelcome truth is always unwelcome. But an
__Open__ unwelcome truth is just hearsay, gossip, a possibility to be
confirmed, or maybe something vague that still needs clarification. This means
that future play events might reveal the "final truth" to be different than
initially revealed or expected. Conversely, a __Closed__ unwelcome truth is a
proven fact. 

  <table><tr><td>

___Open Examples___

  </td><td>

___Closed Examples___

  </td></tr><tr><td>

__World__ - Yes, you remember the arcane formula to open the portal, but it
requires some kind of cost or sacrifice that you are not sure about. Using the
wrong one could have unexpected effects. _What do you do?_

  </td><td>

__World__ - Yes, you easily remember the arcane formula to open the portal, but
it requires the willing sacrifice of one's eye. _What do you do?_

  </td></tr><tr><td>

__World__ - You remember stories about the regenerative powers of this kind of
creature. Your blade might not be enough to see you through a confrontation.
_What do you do?_

  </td><td>

__World__ - You slash at the creature and see its blood spray high, the flesh
rent and the bone broken. But an instant later you also see it heal back as if
nothing had happened. Only a thin black line to show where you cut it. The
creature smiles at you with malevolence. _What do you do?_

  </td></tr><tr><td>

__World__ - Yes, you manage to stalk the assassin and  catch a glimpse of the
face under the hood. It looks like a young woman. Is she your friend's
daughter? You can't yet tell for sure.  _What do you do?_

  </td><td>

__World__ - Yes, you reach the assassin, pull them to the ground, and tear the
hood away from their face revealing... a young woman who you recognise. She's
your friend's daughter! _What do you do?_

  </td></tr></table>

### Take Away Their People

This Reaction can be used literally, allowing NPCs to __capture__ someone. But
it can also be used more subtly by somehow __preventing cooperation__ between
characters, maybe because they can't see or hear their allies, or because
something __separates__ them (distance, crowds, doors, time, etc). 

  <table><tr><td>

___Open Examples___

  </td><td>

___Closed Examples___

  </td></tr><tr><td>

__World__ - If you hold position here, no creature will get through, but in the
commotion, Amara might be dragged away into the treeline. _What do you do?_

  </td><td>

__World__ - You hold position and no creature gets through, but in the
commotion, Amara is dragged away into the treeline. _What do you do?_

  </td></tr><tr><td>

__World__ - The plaza is so full of people that, once you get into it, you and
Cartig might be unable to communicate clearly over the din of merchants and
traffic. _What do you do?_

  </td><td>

__World__ - Wait, the plaza is so full of people that you and Cartig are unable
to hear each other over the din of merchants and traffic. _What do you do
instead?_

  </td></tr><tr><td>

__World__ - If you go back now Darlon might not be there, probably still out
hunting. _What do you do?_

  </td><td>

__World__ - The place is deserted. Darlon must still be out hunting. _What do
you do?_

  </td></tr></table>

### Take Away Their Stuff

You can use this Reaction to give weight and meaning to __the passing of time__
by describing how some item or resource gets depleted, used up, or consumed.
Torches, food, special ammunition are all good candidates. You can introduce a
__new problematic element__ by describing how something steals or ruins
equipment and supplies.

```

Pests eating or fouling rations, street urchins pickpocketing valuables,
creatures reacting badly to some item's smell or presence.

```

You can give relevance to __the environment__ by describing how the
Protagonists need to sacrifice something in order to survive/traverse the world
around them, or how an external condition makes some of their equipment
temporarily unusable. 

```

Dampness might make torches useless, flammable gases or dust in the air might
make torches dangerous, thick vegetation might make big weapons unwieldy and
mounts or vehicles useless and problematic.

```

A more direct and proactive option is also to describe some NPC or
environmental condition literally __taking__ something from the Protagonists. A
skilled opponent might disarm them, a careless action might make them lose grip
on an important item, etc. Or more figuratively, something could take away
their __sight__ (darkness, sand in the eyes, a sudden flash), their __hearing__
(a noisy crowd, a nearby explosion, a violent ear-slap), their __balance__, or
anything else you can imagine could be "taken" from them __given the fictional
circumstances__.

In any of the previous cases, you can decide that the fictional situation also
translates into a mechanical consequence, to be written in a character sheet
altering their status.

  <table><tr><td>

___Open Examples___

  </td><td>

___Closed Examples___

  </td></tr><tr><td>

__World__ - Yes, you can wait throughout the night, but it'll cost you a bunch
of torches (and a level of supplies). _What do you do?_

  </td><td>

__World__ - You've waited through the night and it has cost you quite a few
torches. Lower your supplies. Now, _what do you do?_

  </td></tr><tr><td>

__World__ - You recognize these mushrooms. If you camp here, they will surely
invade your food rations, ruining a level of supplies. _What do you do?_

  </td><td>

__World__ - Your food rations have been ruined by toxic mushrooms. Lower your
supplies. _What do you do now?_

  </td></tr><tr><td>

__World__ - The thug tries to kick sand in your eyes to ___[blind]___ you._
What do you do?_

  </td><td>

__World__ - The thug _[__blind]___s you by kicking sand in your eyes. _What do
you do?_

  </td></tr></table>

### Turn Their Action Back on Them

When a PC fails roll you can imagine one of the NPCs present in the
scene performing the same action against the Protagonists __as if a success__ was
rolled. Apply the consequences as if you were a Player maneuvering their
Protagonist, asking and answering as needed. In so doing, keep a few critical
points in mind:

  - __Never__ use this Reaction to "turn" an attack back on an acting PC.
  - If the only effect of the action is to grant info to the NPC, have them
    __immediately act__ on it.

  <table><tr><td>

___Open Examples___

  </td><td>

___Closed Examples___

  </td></tr><tr><td>

__World__ - You observe the angry crowd but you notice some
of them trying to have a good look at you too. _What do you do about it?_

  </td><td>

__World__ - You observe the angry crowd but the crowd
scrutinises you too! Who among your group is the most vulnerable in this
situation? And what is the best way past you and your allies?

  </td></tr><tr><td>

__World__ - You point your sword at the sailor's throat but in
doing so you notice her trying to slip a knife near your private parts. _What
do you do?_

  </td><td>

__World__ - You point your sword at the sailor's throat but
then you feel pressure near your private parts. As you realise where her knife
is pointing, she says "_Drop YOUR weapon, or else!_" Do you cave, or force her
hand?

  </td></tr><tr><td>

__World__ - Maybe you know something about goblins but
surely goblins know a lot about your people and they seem to be on the verge of
doing something that you don't believe would be pleasant._ What do you do?_

  </td><td>

__World__ - Maybe you know something about goblins but
surely goblins know a lot about your people. Say, what kind of insult would
make a person of your Blood or Kin go absolutely nuts? Ah... interesting...
that is exactly what the goblins start chanting! _What do you do?_

  </td></tr></table>

### Inflict Harm

Almost every game should have a way to inflict harm or wounds to a character,
or to reduce their resistance or HP.  This Reaction lets you describe something
that can cause such effects to __one or more__ characters, be they PCs or NPCs.
To do so you never just state the value to change, but instead:

  1. Describe a fictional action, event, or situation you think could cause the
harm.
  2. Openly follow the game rules for the value adjudication.
  3. If the rules prescribes that some part of the effect being decided by the Player,
let them do it.

Inflicting harm on a Protagonist is a common option, but far from the only one
available to you.

  - __Make violence indiscriminate__  

Players __expect__ the World to damage their Protagonists, and are somewhat
ready for it. Instead, try to often hurt their friends and allies, hurt
innocent bystanders, hurt the land and the buildings and the objects around
them.
  - __Make violence matter__ 

Players __expect__ everyone to select the tamest harm effects when given the
chance. When PCs suffer harm, this is their prerogative. But when NPCs suffer
harm, you decide: show that there is no such thing as "_moderate_" violence by
having the NPCs faint, bleed, vomit, cry ... __ruin__ them.

Proper use of this Reaction touches on many Principles and Agendas. 

  - _Kill Your Darlings Mercilessly_ to shock Players out of complacency, using
    NPCs to show what could happen to their PCs if they are not careful.
  - _Kill Your Darlings Mercilessly_ to reward Players for their efforts and to
    _Be a Fan_ of their Protagonists, felling NPCs when it is the most fun and
appropriate, instead of dragging the action into endless attrition.
  - _Make Sense_ by showing the consequences of dangerous actions.
  - _Be a Fan_ by hurting the Protagonists and the people they care about
    enough to make life challenging.
  - _Be a Fan_ by refraining from hurting them without a fair warning and a
    chance to intervene.

Inflicting harm can often mean something different than broken bones and
bloodstains. Think about inflicting harm of a social nature, or mental,
spiritual, metaphysical, etc.  An harm may be also a way to handle damage
suffered by places, structures, and items. If the game has specific rules for
such effects, just use them.

"__Old__" harm can also be leveraged to great effect. You could inflict __new__
harm by describing how previous effects are getting __worse__: describe what
this worsened state looks and feels like, then adjudicate harm as usual. Or you
could avoid new harm and instead use a different Reaction to simply _Highlight
a Downside_ of their wounds and ailments, or anyway leverage a current harm
effect as fictional positioning to justify other interesting Reactions. 

  <table><tr><td>

___Open Examples___

  </td><td>

___Closed Examples___

  </td></tr><tr><td>

__World__ - You notice an archer pointing their bow at Timo, the guide you
hired. They are about to let the arrow fly. _What do you do?_

  </td><td>

__World__ - Timo, the guide you hired, sits down with a heavy thump, an arrow
protruding from his chest. _What do you do?_

  </td></tr><tr><td>

__Player__ - I jump onto the next roof.  __World__ - Ok, you are aware that the
strain might __Seriously__ mess with your recent wound. What do you do?

  </td><td>

__World__ - You jump to the next roof but, upon landing, you feel a terrible
pain in your side, your shirt quickly reddening. Yesterday's wound must have
ripped open and now __Seriously __hurts.  __Player__ - Damn! Being all bloody
and shaky I guess I now ___look like a mess___ [__Temp_ ___effect]. And yeah,
the pain ___impedes___ me actively [__Serious_ ___effect].

  </td></tr><tr><td>

__World__ - These marauders don't seem like the sophisticated type. Using words
instead of violence might be seen as weakness. _What do you do?_

  </td><td>

__World__ - The marauders laugh at your speech but in doing so they also seem
to abandon their hostile intentions. Afterward, though, you hear them calling
you ___[Sir Big Mouth]___ behind your back.

  </td></tr></table>

### Put them at a Disadvantage

Another common mechanics of lot of games is a way to represent the Advantage or
Disadvantage in performing action. This is often handled with roll modifier,
change in the dice pool, and such.

Just like inflicting harm requires you to describe an action or event which
__explicitly__ causes the harm that will be suffered, this Reaction also
requires you to first and foremost describe actions, events, and circumstances
that __obviously__ cause the Disadvantage that will hinder the Protagonists.
Always offer __a clear source__ for the Disadvantage, as it is an easy way to
offer meaningful and sometimes hard choices without much effort on your part.

__Never__ say "_you get Disadvantage_".

__Always__ say something like "_The wind is devilishly strong, it might make
things difficult_" and then if the PCs ignore it "_So you do it anyway? Cool,
but now you are at a Disadvantage_". 

  <table><tr><td>

___Open Examples___

  </td><td>

___Closed Examples___

  </td></tr><tr><td>

__World__ - A storm is raging outside. Following the tracks of the beast will
not be easy and may put you at a Disadvantage. _What do you do?_

  </td><td>

__World__ - Following the trail of the beast in the middle of the storm is not
easy. You manage to do it, but with Disadvantage.

  </td></tr><tr><td>

__World__ - Ramovar is very skilled and in an honest duel you would be at a
Disadvantage. _What do you do?_

  </td><td>

__World__ - Dueling with Ramovar, you realize his remarkable skill. You are at
an obvious Disadvantage. _What do you do?_

  </td></tr><tr><td>

__World__ - It is clear that you could make yourself understood but, not
speaking the language well, you would be at a Disadvantage in a debate. _What
do you do?_

  </td><td>

__World__ - You are making yourself more or less understood but, not speaking
the language well, you often stumble into mistakes and misunderstandings that
put you at a Disadvantage. _What do you do?_

  </td></tr></table>

### Make an Agent Reaction

Every typology of Agent is associated with a unique list of Reactions
specifically designed to express and showcase the Agent's unique features and
behaviors.

Agent Reactions tend to be __more specific variations__ of normal World
Reactions expressed in the form of a fictional effect, action, or situation,
like "_Someone withdraws and seeks isolation_". As usual, the Reaction text is
meant to both __inspire__ and __limit__, guiding you in interpreting it in the
way that best fits the fictional situation you are reacting to.

Don't try to memorise all the possible Agent Reactions. Instead, make a habit
of doing as you already do for the normal _World Reactions_: quickly __browsing
the list__ of Reactions to see if anything catches your eye. 

# Prep & Agents

What happens between the first and second sessions, and then
again between all the following sessions, is called preparation or just
"__prep__". Beware that this prep work is radically different from the classic
concept of "_planning a campaign_" or even that of "_preparing an adventure_".

Do __not__ pre-plan a story.

Do __not__ pre-arrange a series of encounters.

Instead, what you do in order to _Play to Find Out_ is to use all the notes and
ideas produced at the table in previous sessions, add your own ideas and
questions, and organize it all in such a way as to create a __dynamic and
unstable situation__ surrounding the Protagonists.

The main tools for this job are the __Agents Map__ and all the various Agents
you will note on it.

## What is an Agent?

An Agent is a tool, something or someone that the World uses to depict an
environment that _Makes Sense_, to _Rock the Boat_ by shaking things up, and
bring a specific __theme__ to the fore.

An Agent is __not__ necessarily adverse or dangerous to the Protagonists. An
Agent __acts__ of its own accord and volition, out of the Protagonists'
control. That's all it is and all it does. Sometimes it will provide help and
opportunities. Sometimes it will provide opposition and adversity. Sometimes it
will just shift things around in a way that isn't obviously good or bad.

There are three critical concepts to the creation and use of Agents:

  - Everything is an Agent.
  - Everything is People.
  - Everything is Prep.

### Everything is an Agent

An Agent is __everything__ and __everyone__ that is interesting and relevant in
the world surrounding the Protagonists.

The __people__ they meet. Their enemies, sure. But also the folks in a village,
a memorable barkeep, a named beggar, a dashing traveler. And the PCs'
companions and allies too! The Wayfarer's animal, the Occultist's familiar, any
henchmen, helper, or follower. A Protagonist's friends and family, that
one-night lover, the old battle comrade.

The __creatures__ they encounter. The animals living in a wild area, the
monsters lurking in the dark, the inhabitants of the deep sea, that strange
flower that grows everywhere in this region.

The __places__ they visit. The ancient ruins they are exploring, the silent
forest they are journeying through, the big city that lies to the west, the
creepy house on the hill, the surreal palace hidden at the heart of the swamp.

The __items__ they find. A magical sword, a cursed ring, an arcane tome, an
infamous ship, a legendary map; any item that __could make things happen around
it__, either because it is the focus of desires and plots, or because of unique
characteristics both magical and mundane.

### Everything is People

The easiest and most effective way to create and manage Agents that __make
sense__ and feel memorable, is to handle __everything__ as if it were people.
And when you do, stick to portraying __Simple People__:
find a striking physical feature and use it as a guide to formulate a simple
and straightforward motivation.

Treat animals, monsters, and other living creatures as people.

Treat places, items, and even environmental conditions (such as a plague or a
storm) as if they were people.

If something is relevant enough to become an Agent and appear on the Agents
Map, then __it is people__: it has needs and desires, it has behaviors and
attitudes, it takes actions according to them, and because you always portray
_Simple People,_ these elements are (at least in the World's eyes) __simple and
straightforward__ too. 

```

Creatures are People

A giant black spider sports a streak of white hair that looks a bit like a punk
mohawk. When you then wonder how to play and React as the spider, you can just
think "what would a punk look and behave like?"

Places are People

A river has big curves and slow waters that make you think of the round belly
of a jolly fat man. When you then wonder how to play and React as the river,
you can just think "what would a jolly fat man look and behave like?"

Items are People

A mundane and 100% not-magical jewelry box is for some reason interesting
enough to be developed into an Agent. You look for a striking feature and
decide that it has a lid that is a bit broken and jagged, and that this makes
you think of teeth, like those of an animal.

But you need a person!

So, to what kind of person could those animalistic teeth belong? An aggressive
person, baring their teeth in anger? A sinister person, grinning in a creepy
way? A happy simpleton, flashing a craggy smile without realising how menacing
it could look?

Whatever your choice, when you then wonder how to play and React as the jewelry
box, you can just think "what would that person look and behave like?"

```

### To Agent or not to Agent?

Every "thing" in the game that gets described at the table is, with the
exception of the Protagonists themselves, part of the World's prep: people,
beasts, places, items, etc.

In most cases, such entities only exist in the form of a passing mention. Then
the more they become __interesting__, __important__, or even just
__recurring__, the more they acquire substance and detail. The World will
simply jot down these details for the sake of remembering them: a proper name,
a "body" part characterizing and leading them, maybe a brief description of
their appearance, their role, or their relation to something else-whatever
helps the World know what to say when the entity enters a scene, interacts with
the Protagonists, or is supposed to do something off-screen.

If the World feels that these simple notes are enough, then they are. All prep
exists as a way to help the World organize ideas and info to use in active
play. Nothing more.

So while everything __can__ be an Agent, not everything __has to__ be an Agent.
Not immediately, at least.

Agents can be created __from the bottom up__ when the World deems that
something in their prep is growing into a blob of notes and details. Applying
the Agent structure to this blob is a way to better organize the available
info, making it clearer and more usable.

Agents can be created __from the top down__ when the World needs something in
their prep to immediately have a certain space and importance in the game.
Applying the Agent structure to their raw ideas guides the World through some
important questions and choices, shaping the new "thing" into a more defined
and tangible game element.

Agents can also __change__, as they are simply an agglomerate of notes and
ideas and details. They can and should be routinely __updated__ as the game
goes on. The World always has to __say__ what _Prep_ and _Honesty_ demand, but
this still leaves plenty of room for Agents to
evolve, grow, shrink, or simply be abandoned because along the way the World
felt like bringing some different ideas to the table. In the end, Agents are,
like everything else in this chapter, a __structure__ that the game uses to
help the World organize their notes and ideas.

```

At first, the World mentions the existence of a local bounty hunter. It's a
throwaway detail of no importance.

When the group meets this person, or when they express the will to meet them,
the World decides that she is a woman, that her name is Karis, and that her
leading body parts are her agile and ever-moving fingers.

This seems to be enough for a while. But then the World decides that Karis
should be defined as an Agent. This gives her (as explained in the following
section) a Type, an Impulse, a list of Reactions, maybe some Fate questions,
maybe a Cast, etc.

Later on, the World feels like updating Karis' Agent profile. Maybe the initial
idea seemed cool on paper but felt wrong or unwieldy in play. Maybe game events
suggest a change or evolution of the character and her situation.

The Players might never know about these technical changes, as they are not
privy to the World's notes and prep. The only thing they "see" are the changes
in how Karis is portrayed by the World.

```

#### Secrecy vs Privacy

Prep is meant to be kept private, but not secret.

Private, because by _Draping the Rules in Fiction_ the World's notes will not
be visible to the Players. To the Protagonists, an NPC (like _Karis_, the
bounty hunter from the previous example) is just a person they meet.

But there is no need for secrecy. If the Players do happen to see the World's
notes it won't be a big deal. Knowing that Karis is a basic named NPC rather
than a more fleshed-out Agent makes no difference whatsoever. Knowing that her
Type is __Power__ rather than __Freak__, or that her main __Fate__ is about her
social status rather than her love life, are more telling details, but none of
them will mean anything relevant, as the World might bring them into play in
ways that defy the Players' expectations. Or not! The game won't be ruined
anyway. Nothing of relevance will be spoiled. 

As everyone __plays to find out__, there are no future events set in stone.
Even seeing the details of currently active Hourglasses won't be a real
problem, as they simply organize __possible__ future events that the World
__should have already communicated__ as being on the horizon.

## Creating an Agent

To create an Agent of any kind you need to:

  1. Give a __NAME__ to the Agent, then describe it.
  2. If it has a __CAST__, list it.
  3. Choose a __TYPE__ and copy over its __IMPULSE.__
  4. If it has __CONNECTIONS__ to other Agents, list them.
  5. If you have __FATE__ questions, list them.
  6. If it calls for an __HOURGLASS__, create it.
  7. Place it on the __Agents Map__ and, if it's in motion, mark its direction
with an arrow.

### Name & Description

Find a name you can remember easily, then write a quick sentence describing the
Agent.

### Cast

If the Agent is made up of many elements, list them here. They are important
enough to have a name and be listed here, but not relevant enough (yet) to be a
whole Agent of their own. They could be the most notable faces within a
village, the many places and areas that are part of a bigger landscape, or a
few important items that stand out among the other possessions of an Agent.

### Type, Subtype & Impulse

Once you have an idea of what an Agent is and what it looks like you can
identify its Type. To do so you need to think about __the one important thing__
this Agent should represent.

The same Agent could reasonably fit multiple Types, so a choice has to be made.
Always pick just one Type, the one that most interests you at the moment. Later
in the game, when you review and update the Agents Map and its elements, it is
ok to change an Agent's Type to fit the current and evolving circumstances. The
five available Types are:

  - Affliction
  - Brutes
  - Freak
  - Landscape
  - Power

Each Agent is then put into focus by selecting one out of six available
Subtypes that are specific to each different Type. Every Subtype is also linked
to a unique Impulse. This structure helps the World to organize and then use
all the Agents that will play a role in the story, decide which ones to use,
how they will behave, and why.

Lastly, each Type of Agent offers a shortlist of Agent Reactions.

They work exactly like the more general _World Reactions_, but are simpler and
more direct, often expressing a straightforward "_this thing happens_". Use
them to bring the Agent to the fore and to showcase their unique
characteristics.

#### Affliction

This Agent represents __the actions people take__ because they are exposed to
something bad that afflicts them. Different afflictions push people to behave
in different ways, so ask yourself: how has __the Affliction__ changed people's
lives? What are they pushed to do? How do they feel about it? How do their
actions change the world around them? Is there a way out or back?

_Choose one Subtype of Affliction:_

  - Barrier | Impulse to isolate and impoverish.
  - Belief | Impulse to control choices and actions.
  - Disease | Impulse to expand and saturate.
  - Hardship | Impulse to expose people to danger.
  - Sacrifice | Impulse to leave people bereft.
  - Tradition | Impulse to promote and justify violence.

_Agent Reactions:_

Someone...

  - ... neglects duties, responsibilities, obligations.
  - ... flies into a rage.
  - ... takes self-destructive, fruitless, or hopeless action.
  - ... approaches, seeking help or comfort
  - ... withdraws, seeking isolation
  - ... proclaims the Affliction to be a deserved punishment
  - ... proclaims the Affliction to be, in truth, a blessing
  - ... refuses or fails to adapt to new circumstances
  - ... brings friends or loved ones along

#### Brutes

This Agent represents a __group of people__, with or without a leader, acting
in concert. What you define here is the __group's Impulse__, how people behave
as part of a mob/pack/swarm, but individuals within the group might not share
its Impulse and might even fight against it. 

_Choose one Subtype of Brutes:_

  - Cult | Impulse to incorporate people.
  - Enforcers | Impulse to victimize who stands out.
  - Family | Impulse to close ranks, protect their own.
  - Hedonists | Impulse to consume resources.
  - Hunter Pack | impulse to victimize anyone vulnerable.
  - Mob | Impulse to riot, burn, kill scapegoats.

_Agent Reactions:_

The group...

  - ... bursts out in uncoordinated, undirected violence.
  - ... takes coordinated action with a coherent objective.
  - ... tells stories (truth, lies, allegories, homilies).
  - ... demands consideration or indulgence.
  - ... rigidly follows or defies authority.
  - ... clings to or defies reason.
  - ... makes a show of solidarity and power.
  - ... asks for help or for someone's participation.

#### Power

This Agent represents a person that acts primarily __through other people__, be
it through direct control and command or through subtle influence and
maneuvering. Use Powers to portray strong individuals at the heart of big and
small groups, institutions, and networks. A queen, a gang leader, a
well-connected innkeeper, an ambitious villager.

_Choose one Subtype of Power:_

  - Alpha | Impulse to hunt and dominate.
  - Collector | Impulse to own and acquire.
  - Conqueror | Impulse to consume and overrun.
  - Dictator | Impulse to control and organize.
  - Prophet | Impulse to denounce and overthrow.
  - Slaver | Impulse to own and sell people.

_Agent Reactions:_

The power uses someone else to...

  - ... outflank, corner or encircle someone.
  - ... attack someone suddenly, directly, and very hard.
  - ... attack someone cautiously, holding reserves.
  - ... seize someone/thing for leverage or information.
  - ... make a show of force or discipline.
  - ... negotiate or demand obedience.
  - ... claim territory: move into it, blockade it, assault it.
  - ... buy out someone's allies.
  - ... attack someone where they're weak.

#### Freak

This Agent represents someone or something __out of the ordinary__. A very
talented person, a particularly ferocious beast, a patch of barren land, a book
about a disturbing or forbidden subject. Use Freaks to __highlight a__
__different point of view__, its origins, its relationship with the surrounding
"normal", to face the PCs with an "other".

_Choose one Subtype of Freak:_

  - Abomination | Impulse to bring chaos and ruin.
  - Devourer | Impulse to feed and to have more.
  - Disease | Impulse to touch, invade, be intimate.
  - Fiend | Impulse to feel or inflict pain.
  - Portent | Impulse to excel, to be above others.
  - Victim | Impulse to seek reparation or retribution.

_Agent Reactions:_

The freak...

  - ... shows the nature of the world it inhabits.
  - ... shows the contents of its heart.
  - ... appears as part of someone's day, life, or path.
  - ... ruins, befouls, rots, desecrates, corrupts something.
  - ... takes away or threatens something cherished.
  - ... insults, offends, or provokes someone.
  - ... attacks someone stealthily.
  - ... lashes out, head-on, without threat or warning.
  - ... offers a service, with strings attached.

#### Landscape

This Agent represents how __the environment itself__ can be a character in a
story. A Landscape can be natural or constructed, vast or small. The lands of
_Ansalon_, the spider forest, the ruins of _Kal'taher_, the city of
_Brittlewood_, the sewers, the market, the house on the hill, a dungeon.

_Choose one Subtype of Landscape:_

  - Breeding Pit | Impulse to generate badness.
  - Fortress | Impulse to deny access.
  - Furnace | Impulse to consume things.
  - Maze | Impulse to discourage passage and to entrap.
  - Mirage | Impulse to entice and betray.
  - Prison | Impulse to contain and deny release.

_Agent Reactions:_

The environment...

  - ... presents difficult or dangerous terrain.
  - ... bars or opens the way.
  - ... reveals a different path.
  - ... shifts, moves, rearranges.
  - ... presents a guide or a guardian.
  - ... presents a predator or prey.
  - ... disgorges something.
  - ... shows a glimpse of beauty.
  - ... shows a glimpse of savagery.

### Connections

List here __other__ Agents you consider closely related to this one. This helps
you keep everything under control, and to remember which Agents might be
present or relevant whenever something happens to one of their connections.

### Fate

The World __must not pre-plan__ the future destiny of their Agents. You can
instead express __questions__ about uncertain outcomes you are curious about:

  - Will this one NPC survive?
  - Will the blood stone be found?
  - Will this other NPC get home in time?
  - Will the village ask for help?
  - Will the army invade the western lands?

Fate questions can be big or small in scope, regarding the future of a whole
country or a single NPC, but they must __never be trivial__. The answer to a
Fate question will bring change to the Agent, or the world around it, in a deep
and important way. This is one way to _Ask Honest Questions_, taking the things
you are the most interested in out of your hands, allowing you to _Play to Find
Out_.

### Hourglasses

Another way for the World to bring their ideas to the table and explore what
might happen __without fixing future events__ is to attach an Hourglass to an
Agent.

An Hourglass is a __countdown__ with six positions. At each position, the World
jots down a note on how the Agent, or a situation involving it, will behave and
progress. It is also ok to leave some positions empty, to have events progress
more slowly, or to leave room for future inspiration.

Hourglasses are both descriptive and prescriptive. __Descriptive__, because
when something that you have noted happens in the fiction, then you must
advance the relevant Hourglasses to the appropriate position. __Prescriptive__,
because when a Reaction makes you advance an Hourglass to a new position, then
you must also describe how the noted behavior or event happens in the fiction.

Be sure to __only__ write down things that have to do with your Agents and how
they change the world around them:

  - __Never dictate PC actions__ 

"_Zoltan the Troubadour sings in the plaza in front of the king_".
  - __Never depend on PC actions__ 

"_When Zoltan the Troubadour sings in the plaza, the king notices him_".

You might be tempted to use PC actions to trigger events, like "___if Zoltan
sings in the plaza then X happens"___, but I strongly advise against this. If
the event does not happen, you prepared stuff for nothing. And the fact that
you have a specific outcome in mind __will__ influence your play in a way that
might make you "push" more than you should, stifling your ability to _Play to
find out_. In a word, it's an unhealthy practice that can lead to bad game
behaviors.

An Hourglass can be set up right at the moment of Agent creation, to help you
visualize what you already know is going on, or it can be added later, as
events unfold and the situation changes. Hourglasses are just a way for the
World to organize their notes, so if something happens that changes the fiction
enough to make an Hourglass no longer current or even needed, feel free to
modify it or scratch it completely. 

#### Tracing and Using an Hourglass

The simplest way to trace an Hourglass by hand is to draw two triangles, one
pointing downward and one pointing upward, with their respective "pointing"
vertices intersecting. Then run a straight vertical line down the middle,
splitting it into two halves. This leaves you with a shape divided into six
spaces. Check the pictures in the following example to get a clearer idea of
the final result.

<div style="position:relative;text-align:center;"> <svg width="30mm"
height="35mm" viewBox="-1 -1 61 71" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg"
stroke="currentColor" stroke-width="1" fill="none"
  >
    <path d=" M 0 0 L 60 0 L 30 50 Z M 0 70 L 60 70 L 30 20 Z M 30 0 L 30 70 "
/> </svg> </div>

You can fill the spaces however you like, there is no fixed order, it's just an
evocative way to keep track of a six-step countdown in a fantasy game. I
personally like to follow the imaginary movement of sand in the Hourglass,
slowly filling it from bottom to top, with my six annotations being written
beside it ordered accordingly, from bottom to top. But the only important thing
is that you are clear on what comes first, second, third, etc.

__Example of Hourglass__

  <table><tr><td>

  </td><td>

6 - PCs are officially regional outlaws  5 - PCs are officially local outlaws 4
- regional authorities start nosing around    3 - villagers pursue the PCs 2 -
villagers are hostile    1 - villagers are resentful

  </td></tr></table>

```

Example Agent

Sharpleaf

Affliction - Tradition - Impulse to promote and justify violence

Sharpleaf is a small village of hunters in the Great Forest. The PCs ruined
their sacred garden, Fane (the Wayfarer's wolf) seriously wounded one villager
and escaped fair justice only thanks to Kayman (the Occultist) and his
threatening magic. The locals want the PCs to pay for this.

Cast:

Demetrios O'Brien, village chief [clean face].

Fate:

The villagers believe themselves to be cursed by the desecration - what will
they do to fix this?

Demetrios is demanding justice from the Royal Guard - what will happen?

Connections:

City Guard

6 - PCs are officially regional outlaws

5 - PCs are officially local outlaws

4 - regional authorities start nosing around

3 - villagers pursue the PCs

2 - villagers are hostile

1 - villagers are resentful

```

### The Agents Map

This is the World's __master plan__ where all the moving pieces of the game are
gathered. In a way, it is "just" a list of names, but its structure helps the
World focus on what is important, the current situation, and where it might
lead. It is, in a nutshell, one possible way to organize the World's game
notes.

World's preparation work and campaign building are all about updating the
__Agents Map__ in the time between one session and the next. Think about the
characters, places, and events of the last session; if needed, translate them
into Agents and position them on the map. Go over what was already on the map:
should the Agents be moved? Changed? Evolved? Destroyed? Should they slowly
fade out of the map as their relevance diminishes? Or could they make a
comeback because of recent events? Could they turn into something different?

Truth be told, you do this work in the actual Agent notes. But the Map can help
you visualize them all in one place, arranged in meaningful positions. Speaking
of which... 

#### The Ring Structure

The Agents Map has a central space meant for the Protagonists and all the
Agents that are currently __here__ with them either in a geographical sense
(the Agent is at the PCs' location or in the general area) or in a dramatic
sense (the Agent is "closely" influencing the PCs), whichever meaning better
serves your current organization.

The ring surrounding the center is where the World writes Agents that are
__closer__ to the PCs. The ring surrounding that area is where the __farther__
Agents go. Both of these serve the same purpose as the central ring, just
offering the World more space to move things around in an expressive way and
avoid amassing everything in the same small location.

Finally, the most external ring is where the __whispered__ Agents go, meaning
all the Agents that still only exist as rumours and ideas. These can often be
just names that the World has not yet bothered turning into real, fully-written
Agents because they are still far away on the fictional horizon.

This all works by always keeping the Protagonists at the center of the map,
with everything else moving all around relative to them.

<div style="position:relative;text-align:center;"> 
<svg width="10cm" height="7cm" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg">
  <style>
    .svgtext_a {
      font: 7px thefont;
    }
  </style>
  <rect width="25%" height="10%" x="0" y="0" fill="#f3cccc" />
  <rect width="25%" height="10%" x="25%" y="0" fill="#fef2cc" />
  <rect width="25%" height="10%" x="50%" y="0" fill="#d9ead3" />
  <rect width="25%" height="10%" x="75%" y="0" fill="#d0e2f3" />
  <text class="svgtext_a" x="5%" y="6%"">HERE</text>
  <text class="svgtext_a" x="30%" y="6%"">CLOSER</text>
  <text class="svgtext_a" x="60%" y="6%"">FARTHER</text>
  <text class="svgtext_a" x="80%" y="6%"">WHISPERED</text>  
  <g transform="translate(30,30) scale(0.8,0.8)">
    <rect width="100%" height="100%" x="0" y="0" fill="#d0e2f3" />
    <rect width="75%" height="75%" x="12.5%" y="12.5%" fill="#d9ead3" />
    <rect width="50%" height="50%" x="25%" y="25%" fill="#fef2cc" />
    <rect width="25%" height="25%" x="37.5%" y="37.5%" fill="#f3cccc" />
    <line x1="45%" y1="0" x2="45%" y2="44%" stroke="black" />
    <line x1="55%" y1="0" x2="55%" y2="44%" stroke="black" />
    <line x1="45%" y1="100%" x2="45%" y2="56%" stroke="black" />
    <line x1="55%" y1="100%" x2="55%" y2="56%" stroke="black" />
    <line x1="0" y1="45%" x2="44%" y2="45%" stroke="black" />
    <line x1="0" y1="55%" x2="44%" y2="55%" stroke="black" />
    <line x1="100%" y1="45%" x2="56%" y2="45%" stroke="black" />
    <line x1="100%" y1="55%" x2="56%" y2="55%" stroke="black" />
    <text class="svgtext_a" x="46%" y="7%">NORTH</text>
    <text class="svgtext_a" x="46%" y="20%">NORTH</text>
    <text class="svgtext_a" x="46%" y="33%">NORTH</text>
    <text class="svgtext_a" x="46%" y="43%">NORTH</text>
    <text class="svgtext_a" x="46%" y="60%">SOUTH</text>
    <text class="svgtext_a" x="46%" y="70%">SOUTH</text>
    <text class="svgtext_a" x="46%" y="83%">SOUTH</text>
    <text class="svgtext_a" x="46%" y="96%">SOUTH</text>
    <text class="svgtext_a" x="2%" y="51%">WEST</text>
    <text class="svgtext_a" x="15%" y="51%">WEST</text>
    <text class="svgtext_a" x="28%" y="51%">WEST</text>
    <text class="svgtext_a" x="38.5%" y="51%">WEST</text>
    <text class="svgtext_a" x="56%" y="51%">EAST</text>
    <text class="svgtext_a" x="65%" y="51%">EAST</text>
    <text class="svgtext_a" x="78%" y="51%">EAST</text>
    <text class="svgtext_a" x="90%" y="51%">EAST</text>
    <text class="svgtext_a" x="2%" y="7%">IN</text>
    <text class="svgtext_a" x="15%" y="20%">IN</text>
    <text class="svgtext_a" x="28%" y="33%">IN</text>
    <text class="svgtext_a" x="38.5%" y="43%">IN</text>
    <text class="svgtext_a" x="56%" y="60%">OUT</text>
    <text class="svgtext_a" x="65%" y="70%">OUT</text>
    <text class="svgtext_a" x="78%" y="83%">OUT</text>
    <text class="svgtext_a" x="90%" y="96%">OUT</text>
    <text class="svgtext_a" x="90%" y="7%">UP</text>
    <text class="svgtext_a" x="78%" y="20%">UP</text>
    <text class="svgtext_a" x="65%" y="33%">UP</text>
    <text class="svgtext_a" x="56%" y="43%">UP</text>
    <text class="svgtext_a" x="2%" y="96%">DOWN</text>
    <text class="svgtext_a" x="15%" y="83%">DOWN</text>
    <text class="svgtext_a" x="28%" y="70%">DOWN</text>
    <text class="svgtext_a" x="38.5%" y="60%">DOWN</text>
  </g>
</svg> 
</div>

The map then offers additional "directions" that you can use to inform your
choices when it comes to positioning Agents and moving them around:

  - You have the __North__, __South__, __West,__ and __East__ directions. These
    are useful to represent relative geographical positioning more than
anything else.
  - You have the __Up__ and __Down__ directions. These can describe physical
    positioning: high in the mountains, deep underground, flying in the sky,
low in a valley, etc. Or social status: being rich or highborn, being poor or
lowborn. Or any other concept that the World finds useful to arrange Agents on
the map: it could be useful to position an Agent with a good reputation UP, and
one with a bad one DOWN.
  - You have the __In__ and __Out__ directions. These are the most abstract and
    are used to position Agents according to how well-known / familiar / overt
they are (__In__) or how obscure / alien / covert they are (__Out__). An Agent
might be operating in the very same area where the PCs are (__Here__) but
without them knowing about it (__Out__), or they might know about its existence
but very little about its true nature and inner workings (__Out__). Conversely,
an Agent might be somehow distant from the PCs (__Farther__) but they could be
particularly familiar with it (__In__).

Most of the time the World will reassess the scope and meaning of their Agents
Map depending on what is the most useful for the game at a given time, often
positioning Agents either in a geographical way __or__ an abstract way. At a
time when the PCs are traveling across a broad territory, it might be more
useful to arrange Agents to offer a more geographical view of the situation. At
a time when there is a lot going on in a specific location, be it a small town
or a bustling city, it might be more valuable to position Agents according to
their social standing, or other abstract factors. And even within the same
context, immediate concerns could make some choices more useful than others and
help make sense of seemingly conflicting positioning. 

```

The Cult of the Blue Feather is an Agent.

It mainly operates in a cluster of villages located high in the eastern
mountains.

When the PCs are still far away from that region, the only relevant element
might be that the Agent is Farther to the East.

When later on the PCs arrive in the region, it might be more useful to know
that the Agent is Closer and Up in the mountains.

Once the PCs reach the cluster of villages it might make sense to position the
Agent Here with the Protagonists and Out, because the cult is very reclusive
and it's hard to know anything clear about it.

The Bromies street gang is an Agent.

The gang has its turf in the same town the PCs are currently located, so it
might make sense to position the Agent Here.

But maybe the gang is currently just a vague idea in the World's mind, or just
gossip the PCs have heard only a couple of times, so it could be positioned in
the Whispered ring instead of uselessly crowding the central area.

Or maybe the Agent is real, known, and active, but the game events have veered
in a direction that makes the gang an element that is not pressingly relevant,
so it could be positioned Closer or even Farther to represent its conceptual
distance, again leaving the central area of the map unclogged.

```

## Essential Agents

Right between the end of the first session and before the beginning of the
second one, the World needs to create a short list of "essential" Agents:

  - The place where the Protagonists are, make it a __Landscape__.
  - Every local population present there, make it an __Affliction__.
  - The people in each Protagonist's life, make them __Brutes__, __Freaks,__ or
    __Powers__. This means any friend, family member, enemy, debtor, etc., but
also groups or social institutions.
  - For each Protagonist's __Issue__ and __Doubt__, find some
    thing/person/place that could become an Agent.

Beware that you need to stick to the __essentials__ here! Producing a long list
of Agents is both useless and draining. This is not your job. Your job is to
think hard about what is __strictly relevant__ and turn those things into
Agents. You have already played one session, so use that experience to guide
your work.

Where are the story events taking place? Not the locations where the PCs came
from, nor the place where they theoretically started the story but have already
moved away from. Where are they playing __now__? Are they going to keep on
playing there in the second session, or is it obvious that they will almost
immediately move on to a different location? Because if that's the case you
might be better off shaping __that place__ as an Agent.

Out of the many people in a Protagonist's life, which ones are the few that
will affect their actions and choices __right now__? Not those they left
behind, nor those they have yet to meet, unless they are somehow acting to get
back into the PC's life, or affecting something the PC cares about enough to
influence them __here and now__. Chances are, the list will count just a
handful of individuals, and of those only one or two maybe would be worth
turning into Agents at this time.

Issue and Doubt can be difficult to tie to something concrete, especially at
the beginning. Having at least one Agent that could __somehow tease and prod__
either the Issue or Doubt of a PC is enough to get things started.

These are the __essentials__. If you have time, energy, and ideas you can pour
more work into defining game elements you think will most probably be actively
used in the next session as Agents. But don't overdo it - limit yourself to
just a couple of things. You __don't__ need an NPC to be an Agent in order to
play them in an engaging and effective way. Avoid wasting time on work that is
not (yet) needed. 

### Between Sessions

Between each session and the next be sure to get out your Agents Map and look
it over, __asking yourself a bunch of questions__. What has changed? Have any
Agents come closer? Have any receded further into the distance? Should any
whispers become more tangible? Have any Agents acted or reacted to the world
outside the Protagonists' bounds?

Flip through your Agents and update them. Who was killed? Whose Fate questions
found answers? Do you have new ones for them? How have their Hourglasses
progressed?

__Create new Agents__ for the new notable people, groups, places, and things
you've introduced in play. In doing so keep a few things in mind:

  - Don't look for a __story__; Agents are all you need.
  - Keep your Agents __simple__; complex stories will naturally emerge from
    active play.
  - Don't hold back for a big reveal; don't breadcrumb events to have them last
    longer. All your Agents have __impulses__ they should act on and __body
parts__ leading them around, so have them act whenever possible!

